# Introduction

## Parts of Speech

### What are the parts of speech?

The parts of speech are the primary categories of words according to their function in a sentence.
English has seven main parts of speech, they are nouns, pronouns, verbs, adjectives, adverbs, prepositions, conjunctions, and other parts of peach.


## Inflection (Accidence)

### What is inflection?

Grammatical inflection (sometimes known as accidence or flection in more traditional grammars) is the way in which a word is changed or altered in form in order to achieve a new, specific meaning.

Verbs are the most commonly inflected words, changing form to reflect grammatical tense, as well as mood, voice, aspect, person, and speech. Collectively, this is known as conjugation.

The other parts of speech that can undergo inflection are nouns, pronouns, adjectives, and adverbs. These are categorized collectively under the term declension.

Most inflection is done according to consistent rules and patterns, but, as we’ll see, there are many words that are irregularly inflected.
We’ll look at the basics of conjugation and declension below, and then briefly discuss regular vs. irregular inflection. Continue on to the individual sections to learn more about them in greater detail.

## Syntax

### What is syntax?

Syntax refers to the ways in which we order specific words to create logical, meaningful sentences. While the parts of speech are all the different types of words that we can use, syntax is the set of rules, patterns, or processes by which we can put them together.
Because English is such a flexible language, it can be difficult to understand all the specific nuances that govern these rules and patterns. However, we have some basic building blocks that help us identify the hierarchy of how the language is structured.
