# Inflection (Accidence)

## What is inflection?

Grammatical inflection (sometimes known as accidence or flection in more traditional grammars) is the way in which a word is changed or altered in form in order to achieve a new, specific meaning.
Verbs are the most commonly inflected words, changing form to reflect grammatical tense, as well as mood, voice, aspect, person, and speech. Collectively, this is known as conjugation.
The other parts of speech that can undergo inflection are nouns, pronouns, adjectives, and adverbs. These are categorized collectively under the term declension.

Most inflection is done according to consistent rules and patterns, but, as we’ll see, there are many words that are irregularly inflected.
We’ll look at the basics of conjugation and declension below, and then briefly discuss regular vs. irregular inflection.

## Conjugation

As we noted above, conjugation refers specifically to the inflection of verbs.

### Tense

When we discuss conjugating verbs, we are usually referring to how a verb changes according to tense—that is, when an action happened in time. Verbs in their basic form are naturally in the present tense (specifically known as the present simple tense).

### Aspect

Grammatical aspect is concerned with how an action, state of being, or event occurs in time; we use it with tense to create specific forms of verbs in relation to time.
Each verb tense has four aspects, or temporal structures: the simple, the perfect, the continuous, and the perfect continuous.

### Mood

Most of the time when we speak or write, we are discussing or asking what is true, real, or actually happening. This is known as the indicative mood.

### Voice

Voice has to do with the relationship between a verb and its source of agency—the person or thing performing or controlling the action of the verb. This is usually the subject of the sentence or clause, which is known as being in the active voice. For instance:

- “He wrote the book.”
- “The Millers are preparing dinner.”
  We can also construct sentences in which the subject of the sentence is not the agent of the verb, but rather the object of its action. If the agent is identified, it is only in a prepositional phrase at the end of the sentence. This is known as passive voice. For example:

- “The book was written (by him).”
- “Dinner was prepared (by the Millers).”

### Grammatical person

Grammatical person refers to whether the subject is the speaker or writer (first person), someone being directly addressed (second person), or a person or thing that is being spoken or written about (third person). Each of these can be either singular or plural.

### Speech

Grammatical speech refers to the quotation of or reference to something said or written by someone else. We typically indicate this by shifting a “reporting” verb (said, told, ask, etc.) into the past tense.

## Declension

While conjugation only deals with the inflection of verbs, declension covers the inflection of nouns, pronouns, adjectives, and adverbs.

### Declension of nouns

Generally, we only decline nouns to mark plurality

### Declension of pronouns

For the most part, only personal pronouns are subject to inflection. We decline personal pronouns based on grammatical person, number, gender, and case. The pronouns who and whoever can also be declined to whom and whomever to reflect the objective case; however, this is becoming less common in everyday speech and writing.

| **Person**    | **Number**      | **Gender**              | **Subjective Case** | **Objective Case** | **Possessive Determiner** | **Possessive Pronoun** | **Reflexive Pronoun**           |
| ------------- | --------------- | ----------------------- | ------------------- | ------------------ | ------------------------- | ---------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| First Person  | Singular        | Masculine/feminine      | I                   | Me                 | My                        | Mine                   | Myself                          |
| First Person  | Plural          | Masculine/feminine      | We                  | Us                 | Our                       | Ours                   | Ourselves                       |
| Second Person | Singular/Plural | Masculine/feminine      | You                 | You                | Your                      | Yours                  | Yourself (Yourselves if plural) |
| Third Person  | Singular        | Feminine                | She                 | Her                | Her                       | Hers                   | Herself                         |
| Third Person  | Singular        | Masculine               | He                  | Him                | His                       | His                    | Himself                         |
| Third Person  | Singular        | Neuter                  | It                  | It                 | Its                       | Its (own)              | Itself                          |
| Third Person  | Plural          | Neuter (Gender Neutral) | They                | Them               | Their                     | Theirs                 | Themselves                      |

### Declension of adjectives and adverbs

We decline both adjectives and adverbs in the same way to create comparative and superlative forms. As the name suggests, comparative adjectives and adverbs are used to compare an attribute between two people or things. Superlative adjectives and adverbs, on the other hand, identify someone or something with the highest (or lowest) degree of a certain attribute.

## Regular and irregular inflection

Inflection is usually determined by clear, consistent rules or patterns. This is known as regular inflection. Most of the examples we’ve looked at so far have been according to regular inflection.
However, there are also many instances of irregular inflection, in which the way the word changes is completely unique and does not follow (or seem to follow) any predetermined rules.
For instance, irregular inflection occurs with many of the plurals of nouns. Words like children or mice are irregular plural forms of child and mouse.

It also occurs with adjectives and adverbs when we decline them for the comparative and superlative forms. For example, the adjective good becomes better (comparative) and best (superlative), which are also the inflected forms of the adverb well.

Some adverbs that are formed from adjectives are also irregular—well, for instance, is the irregular adverb form of the adjective good.
Verbs are the most notorious for their irregular inflection, which is defined as having past tense and past participle forms that a) are different from one another, and b) have different spellings than the usual “-d” or “-ed” endings. For instance, the past tense of the verb sing is sang, while its past participle is sung.
